README.md, before:

AssertStruct [![Apache License 2](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-ASF2-blue.svg)](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.txt)
========
AssertStruct is a library for validating complex data structures including hierarchy of POJO objects. 
It allows you to present a data structure as a simplified JSON-like data tree and compare it with a template. 
In case of failure, the difference will be transformed into a simple text presentation that can be edited and analyzed using any text diff tool.

## Table of contents
- [AssertStruct in 30 sec](#AssertStruct-in-30-sec)
- [Motivation](#Motivation)
- [Usage](#Usage)
- [Template format](#template-format)
- [Requirements](#Requirements)
- [Configuration and customization](#Configuration-and-customization)
- [License](#license)
- [Status](#Status)

# AssertStruct in 30 sec
```java
import static org.assertstruct.AssertStruct.assertStruct;

public class PojoTest {
    @Test
    public void inlineTemplateTest() {
        assertStruct("[1,5,3]", new int[]{1,2,3});
    }

    @Test
    public void resourceTemplateTest() {
        assertStruct("./example/pojo.json5", POJO);
    }
}
```
In IDEA first test will generate next failure report:
```
org.opentest4j.AssertionFailedError: Actual object doesn't match provided template,
Diff: diff:///[C:\Boris\PRJ\pet\assertstruct-core\examples\src\test\java\PojoTest.java:38]?/[C:\Boris\PRJ\pet\assertstruct-core\examples\target\assert-struct\PojoTest_inlineTest_38.json5:0]&
Actual value: file://C:\Boris\PRJ\pet\assertstruct-core\examples\target\assert-struct\PojoTest_inlineTest_38.value.json5
expected: [1,5,3] but was: [1,2,3]
Expected :[1,5,3]
Actual   :[1,2,3]
<Click to see difference>
```
And when you will click to see difference you will get:<br>
![Inline diff](./docs/media/inline.png)

For more complex objects it's even more fascinating. In combination with *Console File Caddy* 
Diff row will be transformed to a link which open diff editor for pojo.json5 file.
![Inline diff](./docs/media/pojo.png)

Don't use IDEA - no problem. In the console, you can see the full path to test source and actual value.
Open them in any diff tool you like. Also, if your template has a lot of masked values, it can be useful
to look at the unmasked variant, JSON5-serialized version of the actual value is stored in a separate file.

More examples can be found in the [examples](./examples) folder.

# Motivation
There are many great libraries to validate complex Java objects. However, they are often missing 2 points: 
1. You need to write significant amount of code to validate all required parts of data. This code can be difficult to write and understand.
Also, because of complexity, developers tends to check only some parts of resulting structure. Which can lead to missed errors and edge cases.  
2. You must not only write your test, but also maintained them. In 80% of cases when test failed (or mistakenly not failed), 
it's not actually a bug in code, but wrong test which you must modify because of requirement changes or missed earlier cases.
And in typical scenario to fix test you will need to read and decrypt a bunch of java code and then write even more code to cover required scenario.

In perfect world test code must be:
1. Simple and easy to write.
2. Simple and easy to modify.
3. Document desirable functionally.

This library must be and answer to that issues.
1. Mostly no java code to validate even complex data structure. Usually you will use one function assertStruct 
2. Simple human-readable format for templates. Usually your template will be serialized version of your actual value.
You even don't need to write this template, simply copy and modify answer of first test run.
3. Template format support comments. So you can add some explanations to your test
4. If test fail diff tool will preserve all comments and masked fields. So you will clearly see the failed part.  
5. Extended navigation support. Library automatically discover do you use inline or external file for template and build correct navigation link to your template.
For pre Java15 or complex templated external file will be a better choice, however with a new text block feature inline templates can become very handy.

#### I bit more complex example
```json5
// response of API request /books
{
    generatedAt: '$NOW', // Result must be not cached, so it was generated now +/- few seconds
    /* count property contains actual size of returned list because all items were returned */
    count: '$.items.size()', 
    items: [
        {
            id: '$/[0-9a-fA-F]{8}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{12}/', // UUID
            createdAt: '$ANY_DATE', // We are storing date without time when book was registered 
            updatedAt: '$ANY_DATETIME', // Date and time when record was last updated 
            title: '$* ::String',
            author: {
                id: '$/[0-9a-fA-F]{8}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{12}/', // UUID
                name: '$* ::String',
                surname: '$* ::String'
            },
            pages: '$* ::Integer',
            '$#createdAt.equals(updatedAt)': false // use SpEL to check that created and updated dates are not equal 
        },
        '$...' // rest of items
    ],
    full: true // true if all items were returned
}
```


# Usage
#### Maven
```xml
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.assertstruct</groupId>
            <artifactId>assertstruct-core</artifactId>
            <version>0.9.0</version>
            <scope>test</scope>
        </dependency>
```
Usually you will use default configuration of AssertStruct and static method imported from AssertStructUtils.
```java
import static org.assertstruct.AssertStruct.assertStruct;

    @Test
    public void inlineTemplateTest() {
        assertStruct("[1,5,3]", new int[]{1,2,3});
    }
```
AssertStruct use smart detection of file name in expected parameter.
However, you can use org.assertstruct.Res class to define template resource.
This resource can be reused for multiple asserts or even used as simple data loader
```java
    Res POJO = Res.from("example/pojo.json5");
    Res INLINE = Res.of("[1,2,3]");
    Res AUTO_DETECT = Res.res("{key: 'value'}");

    @Test
    public void assertTest() {
        assertStruct(INLINE, new int[]{1, 2, 3});
    }

    @Test
    public void asStringTest() {
        String templateAsString = AUTO_DETECT.asString();
        assertEquals(templateAsString, "{key: 'value'}");
    }

    @Test
    public void asDataTest() {
        Map data = (Map) AUTO_DETECT.asTemplate().toData();
        assertEquals(data.get("key"), "value");
    }
```
#### Custom config  
If shared, default configuration does not work for you, it is possible to create custom configuration of AssertStruct service class
```java
    @Test
public void assertCustom() {
    AssertStruct
            .with()
            .defaultOrderedLists(false)
            .build()
            .match("[1,3,2]", new int[]{1, 2, 3});
}
```

# Template format
[JSON5](https://json5.org/) file format used to define templates.
Current implementation relies on Jackson parser with toggle on next features 
```
ALLOW_UNQUOTED_FIELD_NAMES
ALLOW_UNESCAPED_CONTROL_CHARS
ALLOW_TRAILING_COMMA
ALLOW_SINGLE_QUOTES
ALLOW_BACKSLASH_ESCAPING_ANY_CHARACTER
ALLOW_NON_NUMERIC_NUMBERS
ALLOW_JAVA_COMMENTS
ALLOW_LEADING_DECIMAL_POINT_FOR_NUMBERS
ALLOW_TRAILING_DECIMAL_POINT_FOR_NUMBERS
ALLOW_LEADING_PLUS_SIGN_FOR_NUMBERS
```
This is not 100% compatible to JSON5, but close enough.
*I'm thinking about implementing even more loose parser, to allow non-quoted strings and "keys" for arrays, but it will be less supported from IDE.*  

Usually template will contain json serialized version of expected value. Matcher will iterate by properties and elements of objects and arrays and compare by equals.
Some keys or values can be represented not by actual value but by some pattern.
For example:
```json5
{ a: '$*' }
```
This template represent dictionary with single key ```"a"``` and with any value.

#### Single and double quotes.
In many cases JSON5 format require quotes, and you can use single or double. 
However, in **double-quoted** strings **all patterns will be ignored**.
Because single quote is simpler to use in Java strings, it is recommended to use single quote where possible. 
#### Comments 
JSON5 format allow single and multiline comments. Library try to detect which comment applied to which field and will try to preserve its position.
```json5
{
  a: 1, // This is comment for field 'a'
  /**
  * This is multiline comment for field 'b'
  */
  b: 2
}
```
#### Formatting
Library will try to preserve trailing commas, indents and line breaks.
However, in some cases when new fields are added or changes of order change formating will fall back to default configuration

#### Object | Map | Dict
By default, properties are unordered and no additional properties allowed. 
In case of failure template properties order will be preserved. Additional properties will be added in place where they will be found during object traversal  
However this can be changed by inline configuration
```json5
{
  '$opt': {
    ignoreUnknown: true,
    ordered: true
  }
}
```
or in shorter form 
```json5
{
  '$opt.ignoreUnknown': true,
  '$opt.ordered': true,
}
```
There 2 pattern types in keys are supported:
* Matchers - will select one or multiple keys from actual value dictionary. For example regular expression
* Evaluator - will calculate a new value and then will try to match this value to corespondent value in template. For example size, or length methods.

#### Arrays | Lists | Collections 
By default, array elements are ordered, and each array element must be matched to a corresponding template element.
This can be changed by inline configuration. Because keys are not allowed in arrays, each configuration must be presented as a special string element of the array.
```json5
[
  '$opt.ordered: true',
]
```
To support arrays of unknown size it is possible to add special values matcher as array element **'$...'** 
For example:
```json5
[1,2,'$...']
```
means array which is started from '1' and '2' and then contains zero or more '2' elements
### Type check
It is possible to add type validation to any value matcher. 
In format *'<pattern> ::FullQualifiedClassName'* or in short form *'<pattern> ::className'*
if it is only class name, then class will be searched in configured list of packages. 
By default, `java.lang`, `java.util` and `java.time` packages will be searched. Can be configured in properties file.

For example:
```json5
'$* ::Number'
```
This means any value assignable to java.lang.Number 

### Matchers

| Pattern            | Description           | Note                                                                            | Key[^1] | Impl |
|--------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|------| 
| $*                 | Any value             | Includes all types, Maps, Lists, null, etc.                                     | +       |      |
| ${*}               | Any Object            | Includes Maps, Objects, etc.                                                    |         |      |
| $[*]               | Any List              | Include collections and arrays                                                  |         |      |
| $NOW               | Current date          | Compare with current date with default precision (1 min)                        |         |      |
| $NOW(n)            | Current date          | Compare with current date with precision of n second                            |         |      |
| $ANY_DATE          | Any date              | Value can be parsed as date with time using default format                      |         |      |
| $ANY_DATETIME      | Any date time         | Value can be parsed as date using default format                                |         |      |
| $ANY_TIME          | Any time              | Value can be parsed as time using default format                                |         |      |
| $DATE(xxx)         | Any time              | Value can be parsed as date or time using format 'xxx'                          |         |      |
| $/regexp/          | Regexp                | Value matched by regular expression                                             | +       |      |
| $.name1.method1()  | Simple evaluator      | Calculate value of field, property or no-arg method                             | +       | -    |
| #expresion         | Calculate expression  | Calculate complex expression using external library. By default SpEL. optional  | +       |      |
|                    |                       |                                                                                 |         |      |

> [^1]: Key column mark Matchers which can be used in keys
 

### POJO support
When actual value is not a 'JSON compatible' type it will be converted to using JsonConverter class.
> JSON compatible structure is an object where each property is or simple type (string, number, boolean) or Collection or Map or null.
Usually during conversion all entries are wrapped in ```org.assertstruct.converter.Wrapper```, which give access to initial value.

This is a lazy operation and will be executed only when needed.
For example if actual value is:
```json5
[
    1,
    2,
    {
        pojoObject: {} // some Java object
    }
]
```
And it matched to the template:
```json5
[1, 2, '$*']
```
pojoObject will be not converted to JSON, because it is not actually used for matching. However, if matching will fail,
all entries will be converted to be able to build the expected result.


There are 2 implementations available: Jackson and Dummy.
#### JacksonConverter
Jackson implementation is optional, and if you want to use it, you need to add jackson-databind and required jackson-datatype-* dependencies explicitly. 
However, it is recommended to use. And if jackson-binding are available in class path it will be automatically used.
Also, if available, JavaTimeModule will be registered.
##### Jackson configuration
There are some properties which can be configured via *assert-struct.properties* using prefix ```ext.jackson.` prefix:

| Property                | Description                                                           |
|-------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ext.jackson.modules     | Coma-separated list of FullQualified class names of Jackson modules.  |
| ext.jackson.dateFormat  | Default date format to use.                                           |

For more complex configuration it is possible to use SPI 
providing class which implements ```org.assertstruct.impl.converter.jackson.JacksonConfigurator``` see [SPI](#SPI).

##### Implementation details
Behind the scene JacksonConverter use logic close to ```Object.convertValue(value, Object.class)```, but without full serialization to TokenBuffer.
On top of provided  

#### DummyConverter
Dummy is fallback implementation and will be used if nothing else was not configured.
For any object it will simply return ```String.valueOf(value)```.

# Requirements
* Java 8+.
* Jackson Core 2.14+.
* Jackson DataBinding. Optional, used as default POJO -> JSON converter. If no JSONConverter present Objects will be converted using toString 
* Spring Core. Optional, used to calculate complex expression. If not present *#expresion* will throw exceptions  

# Configuration and customization
## Default configuration
### Properties file
Most of the configurations can be setup via *assert-struct.properties* file.
All *assert-struct.properties* in classpath will be loaded and applied to default configuration during the startup. 
If you have more then one file in classpath loading order can be adjusted via `priority` property in file, lower priority 
will be loaded earlier, so higher priority will override.
All properties with simple types from ```org.assertstruct.service.Config.ConfigBuilder``` can be used in *assert-struct.properties* file with prefix ```config.```.
Any properties with prefix ```ext.``` can be added, and they are reserved as convenient way to set properties for extensions. 
Default values are defined in core module [assert-struct.properties](./core/src/main/resources/assert-struct.properties) file.
There is full list of [support properties](.docs/properties.md)


### SPI
More complicated configurations and extensions can be done via SPI api.
You must create class implementing `org.assertstruct.service.AssertStructConfigurator` interface
and add `META-INF/services/org.assertstruct.service.AssertStructConfigurator` with a full qualified name of your class.
As example `test/java/config/ExampleAssertStructConfigurator.java`:
```java
package config;

import org.assertstruct.service.AssertStructConfigurator;
import org.assertstruct.service.Config;
import org.assertstruct.service.ConfigDefaults;

public class ExampleAssertStructConfigurator implements AssertStructConfigurator {
    @Override
    public Config.ConfigBuilder configure(Config.ConfigBuilder config) {
        return config;
    }
}
```
And `test/resources/META-INF/services/org.assertstruct.service.AssertStructConfigurator`:
```text
config.ExampleAssertStructConfigurator
```

# Status
The project is under active development. However, implemented part is already working and I inspire everyone to try it.
Any feedback is welcome. 
I'm planning to make first release in a few weeks, so if you are considering to use it in production, please go ahead.

# Roadmap
1. Add more examples
2. Implement *Simple evaluator* to not fully depend on SpEL
3. Add support for <, >, <=, >=, between, etc.
4. Add more SharedValidator like regexp and '$...' as to simplify multiple checks for same field 
5. Extra template features. Please join [discussion](https://github.com/borstep/assertStruct/discussions) to propose new features.
6. Better support for IntelliJ IDEA, to be able to open "compare with clipboard" window for inline asserts.
7. VS Code support

Feel free to ask for new features in [discussion](https://github.com/borstep/assertStruct/discussions).

# License
AssertStruct is licensed under [Apache 2.0 licence](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).


Release notes
-------

### 0.9.0
- Initial release

Commit message:

Unordered arrays are not supported message

README.md, after:

AssertStruct [![Apache License 2](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-ASF2-blue.svg)](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.txt)
========
AssertStruct is a library for validating complex data structures including hierarchy of POJO objects. 
It allows you to present a data structure as a simplified JSON-like data tree and compare it with a template. 
In case of failure, the difference will be transformed into a simple text presentation that can be edited and analyzed using any text diff tool.

## Table of contents
- [AssertStruct in 30 sec](#AssertStruct-in-30-sec)
- [Motivation](#Motivation)
- [Usage](#Usage)
- [Template format](#template-format)
- [Requirements](#Requirements)
- [Configuration and customization](#Configuration-and-customization)
- [License](#license)
- [Status](#Status)

# AssertStruct in 30 sec
```java
import static org.assertstruct.AssertStruct.assertStruct;

public class PojoTest {
    @Test
    public void inlineTemplateTest() {
        assertStruct("[1,5,3]", new int[]{1,2,3});
    }

    @Test
    public void resourceTemplateTest() {
        assertStruct("./example/pojo.json5", POJO);
    }
}
```
In IDEA first test will generate next failure report:
```
org.opentest4j.AssertionFailedError: Actual object doesn't match provided template,
Diff: diff:///[C:\Boris\PRJ\pet\assertstruct-core\examples\src\test\java\PojoTest.java:38]?/[C:\Boris\PRJ\pet\assertstruct-core\examples\target\assert-struct\PojoTest_inlineTest_38.json5:0]&
Actual value: file://C:\Boris\PRJ\pet\assertstruct-core\examples\target\assert-struct\PojoTest_inlineTest_38.value.json5
expected: [1,5,3] but was: [1,2,3]
Expected :[1,5,3]
Actual   :[1,2,3]
<Click to see difference>
```
And when you will click to see difference you will get:<br>
![Inline diff](./docs/media/inline.png)

For more complex objects it's even more fascinating. In combination with *Console File Caddy* 
Diff row will be transformed to a link which open diff editor for pojo.json5 file.
![Inline diff](./docs/media/pojo.png)

Don't use IDEA - no problem. In the console, you can see the full path to test source and actual value.
Open them in any diff tool you like. Also, if your template has a lot of masked values, it can be useful
to look at the unmasked variant, JSON5-serialized version of the actual value is stored in a separate file.

More examples can be found in the [examples](./examples) folder.

# Motivation
There are many great libraries to validate complex Java objects. However, they are often missing 2 points: 
1. You need to write significant amount of code to validate all required parts of data. This code can be difficult to write and understand.
Also, because of complexity, developers tends to check only some parts of resulting structure. Which can lead to missed errors and edge cases.  
2. You must not only write your test, but also maintained them. In 80% of cases when test failed (or mistakenly not failed), 
it's not actually a bug in code, but wrong test which you must modify because of requirement changes or missed earlier cases.
And in typical scenario to fix test you will need to read and decrypt a bunch of java code and then write even more code to cover required scenario.

In perfect world test code must be:
1. Simple and easy to write.
2. Simple and easy to modify.
3. Document desirable functionally.

This library must be and answer to that issues.
1. Mostly no java code to validate even complex data structure. Usually you will use one function assertStruct 
2. Simple human-readable format for templates. Usually your template will be serialized version of your actual value.
You even don't need to write this template, simply copy and modify answer of first test run.
3. Template format support comments. So you can add some explanations to your test
4. If test fail diff tool will preserve all comments and masked fields. So you will clearly see the failed part.  
5. Extended navigation support. Library automatically discover do you use inline or external file for template and build correct navigation link to your template.
For pre Java15 or complex templated external file will be a better choice, however with a new text block feature inline templates can become very handy.

#### I bit more complex example
```json5
// response of API request /books
{
    generatedAt: '$NOW', // Result must be not cached, so it was generated now +/- few seconds
    /* count property contains actual size of returned list because all items were returned */
    count: '$.items.size()', 
    items: [
        {
            id: '$/[0-9a-fA-F]{8}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{12}/', // UUID
            createdAt: '$ANY_DATE', // We are storing date without time when book was registered 
            updatedAt: '$ANY_DATETIME', // Date and time when record was last updated 
            title: '$* ::String',
            author: {
                id: '$/[0-9a-fA-F]{8}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{4}-[0-9a-fA-F]{12}/', // UUID
                name: '$* ::String',
                surname: '$* ::String'
            },
            pages: '$* ::Integer',
            '$#createdAt.equals(updatedAt)': false // use SpEL to check that created and updated dates are not equal 
        },
        '$...' // rest of items
    ],
    full: true // true if all items were returned
}
```


# Usage
#### Maven
```xml
        <dependency>
            <groupId>org.assertstruct</groupId>
            <artifactId>assertstruct-core</artifactId>
            <version>0.9.0</version>
            <scope>test</scope>
        </dependency>
```
Usually you will use default configuration of AssertStruct and static method imported from AssertStructUtils.
```java
import static org.assertstruct.AssertStruct.assertStruct;

    @Test
    public void inlineTemplateTest() {
        assertStruct("[1,5,3]", new int[]{1,2,3});
    }
```
AssertStruct use smart detection of file name in expected parameter.
However, you can use org.assertstruct.Res class to define template resource.
This resource can be reused for multiple asserts or even used as simple data loader
```java
    Res POJO = Res.from("example/pojo.json5");
    Res INLINE = Res.of("[1,2,3]");
    Res AUTO_DETECT = Res.res("{key: 'value'}");

    @Test
    public void assertTest() {
        assertStruct(INLINE, new int[]{1, 2, 3});
    }

    @Test
    public void asStringTest() {
        String templateAsString = AUTO_DETECT.asString();
        assertEquals(templateAsString, "{key: 'value'}");
    }

    @Test
    public void asDataTest() {
        Map data = (Map) AUTO_DETECT.asTemplate().toData();
        assertEquals(data.get("key"), "value");
    }
```
#### Custom config  
If shared, default configuration does not work for you, it is possible to create custom configuration of AssertStruct service class
```java
    @Test
public void assertCustom() {
    AssertStruct
            .with()
            .defaultIgnoreUnknown(true)
            .build()
            .match("{a: 1, b: 2}", mapOf("a", 1, "b", 2, "c", 3));
}
```

# Template format
[JSON5](https://json5.org/) file format used to define templates.
Current implementation relies on Jackson parser with toggle on next features 
```
ALLOW_UNQUOTED_FIELD_NAMES
ALLOW_UNESCAPED_CONTROL_CHARS
ALLOW_TRAILING_COMMA
ALLOW_SINGLE_QUOTES
ALLOW_BACKSLASH_ESCAPING_ANY_CHARACTER
ALLOW_NON_NUMERIC_NUMBERS
ALLOW_JAVA_COMMENTS
ALLOW_LEADING_DECIMAL_POINT_FOR_NUMBERS
ALLOW_TRAILING_DECIMAL_POINT_FOR_NUMBERS
ALLOW_LEADING_PLUS_SIGN_FOR_NUMBERS
```
This is not 100% compatible to JSON5, but close enough.
*I'm thinking about implementing even more loose parser, to allow non-quoted strings and "keys" for arrays, but it will be less supported from IDE.*  

Usually template will contain json serialized version of expected value. Matcher will iterate by properties and elements of objects and arrays and compare by equals.
Some keys or values can be represented not by actual value but by some pattern.
For example:
```json5
{ a: '$*' }
```
This template represent dictionary with single key ```"a"``` and with any value.

#### Single and double quotes.
In many cases JSON5 format require quotes, and you can use single or double. 
However, in **double-quoted** strings **all patterns will be ignored**.
Because single quote is simpler to use in Java strings, it is recommended to use single quote where possible. 
#### Comments 
JSON5 format allow single and multiline comments. Library try to detect which comment applied to which field and will try to preserve its position.
```json5
{
  a: 1, // This is comment for field 'a'
  /**
  * This is multiline comment for field 'b'
  */
  b: 2
}
```
#### Formatting
Library will try to preserve trailing commas, indents and line breaks.
However, in some cases when new fields are added or changes of order change formating will fall back to default configuration

#### Object | Map | Dict
By default, properties are unordered and no additional properties allowed. 
In case of failure template properties order will be preserved. Additional properties will be added in place where they will be found during object traversal  
However this can be changed by inline configuration
```json5
{
  '$opt': {
    ignoreUnknown: true,
    ordered: true
  }
}
```
or in shorter form 
```json5
{
  '$opt.ignoreUnknown': true,
  '$opt.ordered': true,
}
```
There 2 pattern types in keys are supported:
* Matchers - will select one or multiple keys from actual value dictionary. For example regular expression
* Evaluator - will calculate a new value and then will try to match this value to corespondent value in template. For example size, or length methods.

#### Arrays | Lists | Collections 
> **!! In current version only ordered arrays are supported. Support will be added ASAP, for now I'm looking how to balance flexability and performance**

By default, array elements are ordered, and each array element must be matched to a corresponding template element.
This can be changed by inline configuration. Because keys are not allowed in arrays, each configuration must be presented as a special string element of the array.
```json5
[
  '$opt.ordered: true',
]
```
> Unordered arrays matching is quite slow operation and in combination with unstrict matchers like '$*' can cause unexpected results, so use with care.

To support arrays of unknown size it is possible to add special values matcher as array element **'$...'** 
For example:
```json5
[1,2,'$...']
```
means array which is started from '1' and '2' and then contains zero or more '2' elements
### Type check
It is possible to add type validation to any value matcher. 
In format *'<pattern> ::FullQualifiedClassName'* or in short form *'<pattern> ::className'*
if it is only class name, then class will be searched in configured list of packages. 
By default, `java.lang`, `java.util` and `java.time` packages will be searched. Can be configured in properties file.

For example:
```json5
'$* ::Number'
```
This means any value assignable to java.lang.Number 

### Matchers

| Pattern            | Description           | Note                                                                            | Key[^1] | Impl |
|--------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|------| 
| $*                 | Any value             | Includes all types, Maps, Lists, null, etc.                                     | +       |      |
| ${*}               | Any Object            | Includes Maps, Objects, etc.                                                    |         |      |
| $[*]               | Any List              | Include collections and arrays                                                  |         |      |
| $NOW               | Current date          | Compare with current date with default precision (1 min)                        |         |      |
| $NOW(n)            | Current date          | Compare with current date with precision of n second                            |         |      |
| $ANY_DATE          | Any date              | Value can be parsed as date with time using default format                      |         |      |
| $ANY_DATETIME      | Any date time         | Value can be parsed as date using default format                                |         |      |
| $ANY_TIME          | Any time              | Value can be parsed as time using default format                                |         |      |
| $DATE(xxx)         | Any time              | Value can be parsed as date or time using format 'xxx'                          |         |      |
| $/regexp/          | Regexp                | Value matched by regular expression                                             | +       |      |
| $.name1.method1()  | Simple evaluator      | Calculate value of field, property or no-arg method                             | +       | -    |
| #expresion         | Calculate expression  | Calculate complex expression using external library. By default SpEL. optional  | +       |      |
|                    |                       |                                                                                 |         |      |

> [^1]: Key column mark Matchers which can be used in keys
 

### POJO support
When actual value is not a 'JSON compatible' type it will be converted to using JsonConverter class.
> JSON compatible structure is an object where each property is or simple type (string, number, boolean) or Collection or Map or null.
Usually during conversion all entries are wrapped in ```org.assertstruct.converter.Wrapper```, which give access to initial value.

This is a lazy operation and will be executed only when needed.
For example if actual value is:
```json5
[
    1,
    2,
    {
        pojoObject: {} // some Java object
    }
]
```
And it matched to the template:
```json5
[1, 2, '$*']
```
pojoObject will be not converted to JSON, because it is not actually used for matching. However, if matching will fail,
all entries will be converted to be able to build the expected result.


There are 2 implementations available: Jackson and Dummy.
#### JacksonConverter
Jackson implementation is optional, and if you want to use it, you need to add jackson-databind and required jackson-datatype-* dependencies explicitly. 
However, it is recommended to use. And if jackson-binding are available in class path it will be automatically used.
Also, if available, JavaTimeModule will be registered.
##### Jackson configuration
There are some properties which can be configured via *assert-struct.properties* using prefix ```ext.jackson.` prefix:

| Property                | Description                                                           |
|-------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ext.jackson.modules     | Coma-separated list of FullQualified class names of Jackson modules.  |
| ext.jackson.dateFormat  | Default date format to use.                                           |

For more complex configuration it is possible to use SPI 
providing class which implements ```org.assertstruct.impl.converter.jackson.JacksonConfigurator``` see [SPI](#SPI).

##### Implementation details
Behind the scene JacksonConverter use logic close to ```Object.convertValue(value, Object.class)```, but without full serialization to TokenBuffer.
On top of provided  

#### DummyConverter
Dummy is fallback implementation and will be used if nothing else was not configured.
For any object it will simply return ```String.valueOf(value)```.

# Requirements
* Java 8+.
* Jackson Core 2.14+.
* Jackson DataBinding. Optional, used as default POJO -> JSON converter. If no JSONConverter present Objects will be converted using toString 
* Spring Core. Optional, used to calculate complex expression. If not present *#expresion* will throw exceptions  

# Configuration and customization
## Default configuration
### Properties file
Most of the configurations can be setup via *assert-struct.properties* file.
All *assert-struct.properties* in classpath will be loaded and applied to default configuration during the startup. 
If you have more then one file in classpath loading order can be adjusted via `priority` property in file, lower priority 
will be loaded earlier, so higher priority will override.
All properties with simple types from ```org.assertstruct.service.Config.ConfigBuilder``` can be used in *assert-struct.properties* file with prefix ```config.```.
Any properties with prefix ```ext.``` can be added, and they are reserved as convenient way to set properties for extensions. 
Default values are defined in core module [assert-struct.properties](./core/src/main/resources/assert-struct.properties) file.
There is full list of [support properties](.docs/properties.md)


### SPI
More complicated configurations and extensions can be done via SPI api.
You must create class implementing `org.assertstruct.service.AssertStructConfigurator` interface
and add `META-INF/services/org.assertstruct.service.AssertStructConfigurator` with a full qualified name of your class.
As example `test/java/config/ExampleAssertStructConfigurator.java`:
```java
package config;

import org.assertstruct.service.AssertStructConfigurator;
import org.assertstruct.service.Config;
import org.assertstruct.service.ConfigDefaults;

public class ExampleAssertStructConfigurator implements AssertStructConfigurator {
    @Override
    public Config.ConfigBuilder configure(Config.ConfigBuilder config) {
        return config;
    }
}
```
And `test/resources/META-INF/services/org.assertstruct.service.AssertStructConfigurator`:
```text
config.ExampleAssertStructConfigurator
```

# Status
The project is under active development. However, implemented part is already working and I inspire everyone to try it.
Any feedback is welcome. 
I'm planning to make first release in a few weeks, so if you are considering to use it in production, please go ahead.

# Roadmap
0. Implement Unordered Lists !!
1. Add more examples
2. Implement *Simple evaluator* to not fully depend on SpEL
3. Add support for <, >, <=, >=, between, etc.
4. Add more SharedValidator like regexp and '$...' as to simplify multiple checks for same field 
5. Extra template features. Please join [discussion](https://github.com/borstep/assertStruct/discussions) to propose new features.
6. Better support for IntelliJ IDEA, to be able to open "compare with clipboard" window for inline asserts.
7. VS Code support

Feel free to ask for new features in [discussion](https://github.com/borstep/assertStruct/discussions).

# License
AssertStruct is licensed under [Apache 2.0 licence](https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).


Release notes
-------

### 0.9.0
- Initial release
